The chicken first crossed the road in Southeast Asia, landmark gene study finds
By Andrew Lawler Jun. 24, 2020 

It is the world's most common farm animal as well as humanity's largest single source of animal protein. Some 24 billion strong, it outnumbers all other birds by an order of magnitude. Yet for 2 centuries, biologists have struggled to explain how the chicken became the chicken.
Now, the first extensive study of the bird's full genome concludes that people in northern Southeast Asia or southern China domesticated a colorful pheasant sometime after about 7500 B.C.E. Migrants and traders then carried the bird across Asia and on to every continent except Antarctica.
Our results contradict previous claims that chickens were domesticated in northern China and the Indus Valley," researchers led by Ming-Shan Wang from the Chinese Academy of Sciences's Kunming Institute of Zoology write in a paper published today in Cell Research. They also found that the modern chicken's chief ancestor is a subspecies of red jungle fowl named Gallus gallus spadiceus.

"This is obviously a landmark study," says Dorian Fuller, an archaeologist at University College London who was not involved in the effort. He adds that the results could shed light on the emergence of agriculture and early trade networks, and what features of the bird made it so attractive to people.

Charles Darwin argued the chicken descended from the red jungle fowl because the birds resemble each other and can make fertile offspring; he speculated that domestication happened in India. But five varieties of the pheasant inhabit a broad arc extending from the jungles of Indonesia to the Himalayan foothills of Pakistan. Which variety led to the chicken, and where, was uncertain. Based on presumed chicken bones, archaeologists claimed, variously, that people domesticated the bird 9000 years ago in northern China and 4000 years ago in Pakistan.

DNA studies promised to resolve the issue, but researchers had few samples from the bird's wild relatives. So Jianlin Han, a geneticist at the Joint Laboratory on Livestock and Forage Genetic Resources, embarked on a 20-year project to sample indigenous village chickens and wild jungle fowl near more than 120 villages across Asia and Africa.

Wang's team sequenced the full genomes of 863 birds and compared them. The results suggest modern chickens descend primarily from domesticated and wild varieties in what is now Myanmar, Laos, Thailand, and southern China (see map, right). "This region is a center of domestication," says co-author and geneticist Olivier Hanotte of the University of Nottingham. The results confirm a hypothesis put forward in 1994 by Japan's Crown Prince Akishino, an ornithologist, on the basis of mitochondrial DNA data.

Wang's team did find some evidence for a South Asian contribution: A jungle fowl native to the Indian subcontinent may have interbred with the chicken after its initial domestication in Southeast Asia, the team says.

The new DNA data link domesticated chickens most closely to the Southeast Asian subspecies G. g. spadiceus, however. They suggest the lineage that became the modern chicken branched off from the jungle fowl between 12,800 and 6200 years ago, with domestication occurring sometime after the lineages split.

uller doubts the bird was fully domesticated before the arrival of rice and millet farming in northern Southeast Asia about 4500 years ago. Hanotte acknowledges that "we need the help of archaeologists" to understand the human events that triggered domestication.

But Jonathan Kenoyer, an archaeologist and Indus expert at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, remains skeptical that the chicken arose in Southeast Asia. "They need to get ancient DNA" to back up their claims, he says, because genomes of modern birds may provide limited clues to early events in chicken evolution.

Nor does the DNA show what first enticed people to tame the bird. Early varieties were far scrawnier and produced fewer eggs than today's industrial varieties, and their predators were legion. Some researchers suggest the bird was initially prized for its exotic plumage or for cockfighting. Selling prize fighting cocks remains a lucrative business in Southeast Asia, and the birds' high value may have spurred traders to carry them long distances.

Smithsonian Institution archaeozoologist Melinda Zeder calls the new paper "fascinating" and says it shows "the domestication and dispersal story is more complicated than we thought." She urges combining genetic and archaeological data to flesh out the tale. Archaeologists are now gathering chicken bones that suggest farmers in southern China and Southeast Asia first domesticated the bird some 3500 years ago-findings that bolster the genetic work.

Han's group, meanwhile, is creating a massive data set based on more than 1500 modern chicken genomes from Asia, Europe, and Africa. The researchers plan to analyze chicken dispersal into Europe and Africa, as well as the genetic variations behind traits such as the ability to withstand disease or produce more eggs. "This study opens a whole new page in chicken genomics," Han says.


Pocket Therapist

Mobile phones have changed the field of mental health self-treatments. Mobile phone user no longer needs therapist to start their own therapy. Mobile phone applications offer versatile possibilities of self-development for the user. User can develop their cognitive abilities, memory, or gain some stress-management tools. User can also treat their depression or anxiety with a mobile phone app.

Mobile software applications are easy-to-approach-tools for many mental issues. They are always available and ready to offer guidance mobile phone owner is seeking. Most of the apps are also very affordable if compared to therapists, psychologists, or mental guides of any sort. Mental health apps can comfort the user also when it is not otherwise possible. Everything sounds fine, but it still raises many questions, like "How efficient, these self-treatment applications are?"

Liza Hoffman, Emily Benedetto, Hsiang Huang, Ellie Grossman, Dorosella Kaluma, Ziva Mann, and John Torous researched the effectiveness of mobile apps meant to help with insomnia, anxiety, and depression. They included several different mobile phone applications to their research to cover a variety of mental health issues. Based on their research "Augmenting Mental Health in Primary Care: A 1-Year Study of Deploying Smartphone Apps in a Multi-site Primary Care/Behavioral Health Integration Program, Al", approximately 2/3 of patients using mobile apps considered them useful and helpful. Even though most users found apps useful, there is still a remarkable minority that could not benefit from them. Approximately 20% of patients could not use mobile apps. This was also the major reason they did not benefit from apps. I calculated based on these numbers that lack of ability to use the apps explained about 60% of the cases where apps were not useful.

Another research focused on one software application. The article "Guided Self-Help Works" explains the test results of the anxiety disorder and depression treatment app Pasifica. The research goal was to find out if Pasifica could help those who must wait for their first appointment. Pasifica offers guided exercises and peer-support. Peer-support is not moderated or controlled by health professionals. It allows app users to share their experiences anonymously. Researches compared Pasifica's users to people who were on the wait list for treatment. Using the app offered significant help for patients who were waiting for their first appointment with their therapist. Researches did not compare Pasifica's users to those patients who had already had therapy sessions.

Often researches of mental health apps have a focus on how the app works as a sidekick. It is obvious, that mental health apps make a valuable contribution that improves the user's condition. That is why scientists tend to consider mental apps as great tools. In both cases mentioned above, researchers concluded that apps are surely better than doing nothing. In these researches traditional therapy scheme is still untouched. Therapist still leads and guides therapy and mobile phone user is still patient, who is subject to medical care treatment.

This traditional scheme is now changing. In some cases, mobile phone app is the solution instead of being part of the solution. An app can really take the role of the solo artist and replace a human therapist. Insomnia, for example, is an issue that has also app-based therapy. In the article Efficacy of a Theory-Based Cognitive Behavioral Technique App-Based Intervention for Patients With Insomnia: Randomized Controlled Trial, researchers conclude that stand-alone insomnia treatment with the digital cognitive behavioral technique has positive results. The only human insomnia therapist, the app user needs, is the one looking back from the mirror. Maybe it is also reflecting future of the mental therapy.

Trump is not just in denial but also indifferent to an unfolding American tragedy
Stephen Collinson Profile

Analysis by Stephen Collinson, CNN

Updated 0502 GMT (1302 HKT) June 25, 2020

It's a "public health train wreck in slow motion," in the words of one health expert, and the best President Donald Trump cares to offer the thousands more Americans projected to shortly die of Covid-19 is the unsubstantiated prospect of a "beautiful surprise."
The US just hit its third highest ever peak of new coronavirus cases, multiple states are registering their own daily records and three are now taking the extraordinary step of imposing quarantines for citizens from pandemic hotspots. The world's most powerful nation lacks a coherent national strategy to meet another cresting viral crisis, the capacity or even the willingness to take steps that might stop it.
It is also led by a man who is suggesting by his actions and attitudes that he doesn't care that much about the unfolding tragedy.

Trump, who has previously predicted a "miracle" would occur or the virus would just disappear in the warmer weather, again declared falsely Wednesday that the danger had passed -- even with the nation racing towards another deadly summit of infection. In his latest misleading effort to create a picture of normality, Trump welcomed Polish President Andrzej Duda to the Oval Office.

"This is the first after Covid, after the start of the plague as I call it," Trump told his visitor, who was happy to play along after being given a huge political gift of a visit a few days before a national election and approvingly noted "the end of the coronavirus."
But the coronavirus pandemic in the United States is like watching a "public health train wreck in slow motion," said Dr. David Blumenthal, president of The Commonwealth Fund, in an Alliance for Health Policy and Commonwealth Fund webinar on Wednesday.
"It can be frustrating and perplexing," he added. "But now is the time to stop dwelling on the past and to start looking forward, and to ask ourselves how we can seize the moment, learn from experience and make things better."
Instead, the President's attitude appears to have crossed into callous indifference.
Trump has long denied the worsening situation over his failed gamble of pushing for aggressive state openings to revive the economy on which his reelection hopes may depend. He has constantly flouted guidance on mask wearing and social distancing, insisted on being pretty much the only entity in the Western world holding indoor events that risk turning into deadly super-spreaders and has failed to hardly ever mention the victims of the pandemic.

His behavior has brought about the extraordinary spectacle of a President running for a second term ignoring a massive national crisis that has killed tens of thousands of Americans and has no end in sight.
Trump reached for his familiar tactics of distraction on Wednesday, all but accusing Democrats of supporting unidentified demonstrators who he said want to haul down statues of Jesus Christ, as he stepped up they culture war tactics he adopted during the nation's national reckoning on race.
In a Wednesday news conference, Trump largely ignored the huge and worsening national crisis. But he delivered his latest evidence-free prediction of stunning medical advances on vaccines and therapeutics not yet supported by any evidence.
"I think you're going to have a big surprise, a beautiful surprise, sooner than anybody would think."
Vice President Mike Pence, the head of the White House coronavirus task force who hasn't held a public briefing with top health officials in weeks, apparently sought to spin the situation when he traveled up to Capitol Hill for lunch with Republican senators.
South Carolina Republican Sen. Lindsey Graham said Pence mentioned lowered mortality rates from the virus and said that the provision of emergency protective equipment in hospitals was in good shape.

Busted Gamble

Given the terrible economic consequences of lockdowns imposed to bend the curve of infections several months ago, there was always going to be a limited tolerance for long-term shutdowns. But the White House has long since given up offering Americans advice on how to prepare themselves for venturing out into the world.
Indeed, Trump gladly ignored his own government's advice on when it was safe for states to reopen.
The facts of the pandemic now clearly show that northeastern states that imposed painful restrictions on their people for longest -- such as New York and New Jersey -- have been most successful in reducing infections. Those that most enthusiastically accepted Trump's urging to open -- such as Texas, Florida and Arizona -- are now racing towards their own crisis points.
One exception is California, which despite months of draconian public health measures is still in the middle of its battle. The rising infections in opening states also raise the grim possibility that even those who have carefully begun to get back to business in the northeast and the Midwest will see infections soon tick up again.
A new battery of infection figures and academic projections on Wednesday reflected how the United States is heading into an intensifying duel with the virus, even as its economic competitors like the European Union -- now mulling a ban on American visitors and which has a higher population than the US -- begin to contemplate life after successfully suppressing the pandemic, at least for now.
Arizona is currently seeing the highest number of new coronavirus cases per capita of any state in the country, and more than any other state besides New York or New Jersey has experienced, according to a CNN analysis of data from Johns Hopkins University which puts the rate at about 38 new cases per 100,000 people per day.
Texas Republican Gov. Greg Abbott warned in an interview with KFDA-TV on Wednesday that his state was facing a "massive outbreak" of the virus. Florida piled up another daily record, of 5,500 new cases of Covid-19. CNN data based on figures collected by Johns Hopkins University also finds that 26 states now have rising infection rates, including 10 where cases are going up by 50% or more each day. Another 10 states are steady and 14 states are seeing falling new infections.

No direction from leaders

There is little direction coming from political leaders, including those in worst affected states who are loath to shut down economies again and on a national level inside and outside the White House. Still, if hospitalizations and death rates begin to rise, as experts predict they will as people being infected now get more sick in the weeks ahead, there could be agonizing and politically dicey decisions for state governors about restoring some kind of restrictions on their citizens.
Florida Republican Gov. Ron DeSantis, a Trump ally who is refusing to make mask wearing mandatory statewide, said Tuesday: "Ultimately, we've got to trust people to make good decisions."
His fellow Sunshine State Republicans in the Senate don't seem to have better ideas.
"We're not where we need to be" Sen. Rick Scott said Wednesday, but while advocating wearing masks and social distancing, he added that Floridians were "tired of people telling them what to do." Sen. Marco Rubio, when asked about the situation, said: "Everyone should just wear a damn mask."
Health experts, whose predictions about the course of the virus and the consequences of reopening states have proven to be far more accurate than those of the White House, increasingly appear to be despairing about what is about to unfold.

Dr. Leana Wen, an emergency physician and visiting professor at George Washington University's Milken School of Public Health, warned that the sacrifices made by millions of Americans who lost jobs in lockdowns designed to flatten the curve of infections and ease pressure on hospitals were being squandered.
"Unfortunately, we reopened too soon," Wen told CNN's Don Lemon on Tuesday night. "We also reopened also in not the safest way possible and now we are seeing these surges all across the country. We are basically back to where New York was back in March except that this time I don't think there is the political will and the public support to have these shutdowns to be able to control this virus from really surging out of control."

Gravitational waves reveal lightest black hole ever observed
By Adrian ChoJun. 24, 2020 , 2:15 PM

Gravitational wave detectors have spotted a cosmic collision in which a giant black hole swallowed up a mystery object seemingly too heavy to be a neutron star, but too light to be a black hole. Weighing in at 2.6 times the mass of the Sun, the object falls into a hypothetical "mass gap," a desert between the heaviest neutron star and the lightest black hole that some theories predict-suggesting the gap doesn't exist and that those theories need to be amended.

"People who thought there was a mass gap will have to rethink it, for sure," says Cole Miller, an astrophysicist at the University of Maryland, College Park, who was not involved in the observation. He adds, however, "People aren't going to be joining cults because they cannot survive this change in their worldview."

The data come from physicists working with the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO), a pair of detectors in Louisiana and Washington state, and Virgo, a similar detector in Italy. All three consist of huge, exquisitely sensitive optical instruments that can detect the fleeting stretching of space itself set off when two massive objects, such as black holes, swirl into each other. Since LIGO first sensed such gravitational waves in 2015, physicists have spotted dozens of mergers. And on 14 August 2019, the LIGO and Virgo detectors spotted a merger of objects with masses 23 and 2.6 times that of the Sun, the joint LIGO-Virgo collaboration announced yesterday.

It's the 2.6-solar-mass object that raises eyebrows because it falls squarely in the mass gap, says Vicky Kalogera, an astrophysicist and LIGO team member from Northwestern University. "Now, for the first time, we have seen such an object," she says. By sensing only the gravitational waves from the collision, LIGO and Virgo cannot tell for sure what the object is, she says. But nuclear physics suggests a neutron star heavier than about 2.2 solar masses cannot support its own weight, so the object is "almost certainly" a black hole, Miller says.

Yet it's not easy to form a black hole this light, explains Feryal Ozel, an astrophysicist at the University of Arizona. Prior to the advent of LIGO and Virgo, the only observational evidence for black holes came from the study of about 30 in our own galaxy, each of which orbits a companion star that feeds hot matter into it. None of these black holes weighs less than five solar masses, Ozel noted and colleagues noted in 2010. So they posited a mass gap between about 2.5 and five solar masses in which there should exist neither neutron stars nor black holes. But that notion rests on observation, Ozel stresses. "Is there are a fundamental physics reason black holes can't form below five solar masses? We certainly don't think so," she says. "But, there must be something in the wave massive stars evolve that makes it very hard."

Subsequently, theorists explained why that may be so. Either a neutron star or a black hole can form when a massive star runs out of hydrogen fuel and its core begins to collapse. If the star is light enough, the core will collapse to a neutron star in a supernova explosion that blows away the rest of the star. If the star is too massive, however, its core will shrink to an infinitesimal point, leaving behind only its superintense gravitational field: a black hole. Theories suggest that, for these heavy stars, all but the outermost layers of the star fall in, boosting the black hole's mass to five solar masses or more.

The new observation may put a dent in that theory-which Miller says has already met with some skepticism. "The supernova theorists who do the real modeling basically say, 'Look, show us for sure there's a mass gap and we'll work on it,'" he says. And Ozel, one of the original proponents of the mass gap, seems unperturbed by the find. "It's very exciting," she says. What's more, LIGO and Virgo have shown that it's possible to form a low-mass black hole in a different way. In August 2017, they spotted the merger of two neutron stars, which produced, presumably, a black hole of 2.7 solar masses.

The real puzzle may be the extreme mismatch in the masses of the black holes in the new observation, says Brian Metzger, a theoretical astrophysicist at Columbia University who was not involved in the work. Just a few weeks ago, LIGO and Virgo announced an event in which one black hole outweighed the other by a ratio of four to one. In the new event, the ratio is nine to one. "The interesting thing is the extreme mass ratio, which is hard to produce through most [models] people have focused on," Metzger says.

Nobody knows how tightly orbiting pairs of black holes form in the first place. Most theorists have focused on two general scenarios, Metzger says: either orbiting pairs of stars that both collapse to form black holes or individual black holes that rattle around in tiny, old galaxies called globular clusters that somehow manage to pair up. Both scenarios tend to make pairs in which the black holes have similar masses. So theorists may have to dream up new hatcheries for lopsided black hole pairs, Metzger says, perhaps by starting in the dense centers of large galaxies.


Analysis by Stephen Collinson with Caitlin Hu

Updated 0220 GMT (1020 HKT) June 25, 2020

Teddy Roosevelt is getting the boot. Ulysses S. Grant got knocked off his plinth. Thomas Jefferson was toppled. Even George Washington has been defaced.
Protests sparked by the police killing of George Floyd have now ignited a sweeping national debate about the racial prejudices of some of the country's political icons. Monuments to Confederate generals who fought with secessionist states in the Civil War to preserve slavery, as well as President Donald Trump's favorite president, Andrew Jackson, whose record was replete with racism, are obvious targets for tear-downs.
Some would also like to go further, removing tributes to Ulysses S. Grant, the Civil War general and later president who defeated the Confederacy but whose family owned slaves; Thomas Jefferson, a slave owner who developed modern democracy and pioneered the American Enlightenment's elevation of science, reason and individualism; and George Washington, who defined the US presidency itself and kept hundreds of slaves, freeing them only upon his death. Whether messing with their bronze and marble likenesses amounts to a dangerous erasure of history or is a needed corrective despite their achievements is now the subject of fierce debate.

In some cases, what's at issue is how the famous figure was memorialized. Outside the American Museum of Natural History in New York, a statue dedicated to Theodore Roosevelt -- who faced vitriol in his time for inviting Booker T. Washington, a former slave, author and community leader, to dine at the White House in 1901 -- depicts him astride a horse, flanked by an African American and a Native American on foot, in what critics agree is a symbol of racial subjugation. (The statue is coming down.)
The extent to which great historic figures are stained by their participation in the racist codes of their age is hugely complicated. Yet why should an African American child in the 21st century have to learn in a school named for a Founding Father who owned their ancestors? And why shouldn't White Americans, who have never faced the impediments of their Black neighbors, consider the context of their own forefathers' accomplishments?
Pulling down statues can't change what happened. And digging up the past is treacherous because no one knows where it will end. Reexamining history is painful and requires nuanced public debate -- but is impeded by social media rants, mob scenes and politicians' attempts to demagogue history for their own gain.
'Change it to avoid embarrassment'
People of color in the US are no stranger to the dismantling of their historic and cultural artifacts -- even their own names. A professor in California was recently placed on administrative leave after arguing with a student over his request to "Anglicize" her name. On the second day of class, Laney College mathematics professor Matthew Hubbard asked Phuc Bui Diem Nguyen to "Anglicize" her name because "Phuc Bui sounds like an insult in English," Hubbard told Nguyen in an email obtained by CNN.
She firmly declined, but the professor pursued his request, explaining that her name sounded like "F*** Boy" to his ear. "If I lived in Vietnam and my name in your language sounded like Eat a D***, I would change it to avoid embarrassment," he said. He later told The New York Times that his first email was "a mistake." "The second email is very offensive, and if I had waited eight hours, I would've written something very different," he added.

Covid-19 has "brought this nation to its knees," Dr. Robert Redfield, director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said Tuesday. As of Tuesday, half of all US states had recorded higher rates of new cases compared to last week. No state has effectively transitioned from stay-at-home orders "to a public health model of testing, tracking, isolating and quarantining," said Dr. Richard Besser, former acting director of the US CDC.
The new normal
You may not be able to vacation on the Mediterranean anytime soon, but as some Americans rail against masks and social distancing rules, Italy offers a vision of the future from afar. According to Italian photographer Federico Floriani, life is mostly back to normal in Milan, capital of the coronavirus-hit Lombardy region -- though it's a far cry from the kind of normal that we'd all like to return to.
Businesses are open and restaurants humming, but if you want to enter a supermarket, shop for clothes or board a train at the city's cathedral-like Milano Centrale terminal, you'll have to submit to a fever check. "It's different (from before the coronavirus struck) -- the feeling of being under surveillance," Floriani says. "The other day, I took the train from Milan to Treviso and they check you -- they check your temperature at the train station. It feels like they're looking at you all the time."
The city's sacred aperitivo is back, too, but the famously abundant spreads of stuzzichini -- finger foods like fried green olives and stuffed pumpkin flowers -- that typically accompany an early evening cocktail on the terrace in Milan are no longer. "When they bring food, it's all packaged, whereas we used to have buffet," says Floriani. "Everything is more organized than before because everything has to be under control and nobody wants to take any risks."
"Work wise, if you go to a (photo) set, you still need to get your temperature checked. You have to wear a mask, and you have to declare that you don't have Covid-19," he adds. "It's summer, so I don't like wearing a mask but I do it." But the meticulous precautions are just a "facade" that many Italians only pretend to go along with, he adds.
"You can divide people into two or three categories: the ones who are still really afraid of people, so they're still in a kind of quarantine and avoid going into public places and being close to others. Then there's somebody like me, who does almost everything but I'm not going to have beers or aperitivo. I'm just seeing close friends," he says.
"And then there are -- perhaps half of all people -- who don't give a f***. For them, life is really back to normal."
The Uceli Quartet performed for an audience composed exclusively of potted plants in Barcelona&#39;s Liceu Grand Theatre on June 22.

Our Border has never been more secure

Never mind the rising coronavirus infection rate. "Our border has never been more secure," US President Donald Trump said on Tuesday during a trip to the US-Mexico border at San Luis, Arizona.

As CNN's Priscilla Alvarez reports, Trump's campaign promise to build a wall and overhaul immigration is taking on renewed urgency as the November election approaches. One day after announcing that he would keep limits on visas for both skilled workers and asylum seekers, Trump's administration billed his trip to the border as a celebration of the completion of 200 miles of new wall system.
But the 200 miles are only a portion of the administration's goal to build 450 miles by the end of this year. Of those, roughly 3 miles have been constructed in areas where no barriers previously existed. The majority of miles replaced old, outdated designs with an enhanced system, according to US Customs and Border Protection.


Fauci warns of disturbing trend as Trump ignores viral surge
Stephen Collinson Profile

Analysis by Stephen Collinson, CNN

Updated 0820 GMT (1620 HKT) June 24, 2020

President Donald Trump's top health advisers say that the coronavirus pandemic has driven America to its knees amid a disturbing surge in cases. But Trump is ignoring the new danger, instead using the worst domestic crisis in decades as a racist punchline.
Political mismanagement of the situation, the glaring lack of a national strategy and the nation's exhausting, inconclusive struggle with the coronavirus was reflected Tuesday in three key developments. Fully half of US states are now seeing rising cases of the disease with the situation especially acute in Texas, Florida and Arizona, which embraced aggressive reopening programs. The European Union, which has been more successful than the US in suppressing Covid-19, warned it might bar visitors from America in what would be a major embarrassment for Trump. And the President persisted with his counter-logical argument that the US is only seeing more cases of the virus because it is doing more testing, leaving the implication that it would be better if rising cases, infections and ultimately deaths were simply ignored.

Trump spent the day in Arizona and held a rally in Phoenix, a city where mask wearing is mandatory in public. But he refused to don a face covering, along with many supporters who attended his indoor event. And he delighted his fans by reciting a racist name for the virus referencing its origin in China.

"Kung flu?" Trump said, prompting roars from his crowd.
It was a different story in Washington as the government's top infectious diseases specialist, Dr. Anthony Fauci, made what is becoming an increasingly rare public appearance in an official capacity in a hearing on Capitol Hill and warned -- contrary to Trump's assurances that the disease is "fading" and "dying out" -- that "we're now seeing a disturbing surge of infections."
Fauci, who has consistently expressed concern at the wave of aggressive economic openings championed by the President, warned that the next couple of weeks "are going to be critical in our ability to address those surges that we're seeing in Florida, in Texas, in Arizona, and in other states. They're not the only ones that are having a difficulty."
Increasing cases of the virus, which do not represent the "second wave" medical experts have long feared but more a broadening of the first wave that crashed onto coastal cities and urban areas, are beginning to frame up a daunting question for state and national political leaders: will the situation get so bad that a return to more restrictive and even stay at home measures will need to be considered?
Such a step -- by mostly Republican state governors, some of whom have pledged there will be no return to lockdowns -- would cause a huge confrontation with the President, who sees a rapid economic resurgence as vital to his hopes of winning a second term.

States like Arizona, Texas and Florida are moving in the wrong direction, and there are increasing warnings that if they remain on their current course that hospitals could be overwhelmed in weeks and months to come, leaving leaders with agonizing choices of whether to reverse openings or to somehow surge medical capacity to deal with an increasing death toll.
Texas recorded a new single day record of 5,489 new infections. Republican Gov. Greg Abbott, a key Trump ally, warned Monday that daily positive cases, hospitalizations, and the positivity rate were all spiking in the Lone Star State and could require serious action.
"If we were to experience another doubling of those numbers over the next month, that would mean that we are in an urgent situation where tougher actions will be required to make sure that we do contain the spread of Covid-19," he said.
But Lina Hidalgo, a judge in Harris County that includes the city of Houston, warned that authorities didn't have a month to wait.
"We are in the second highest level of threat, of concern," Hidalgo told CNN's John King on Tuesday.
"And if these things continue, and I am looking at it on a day-to-day basis, we would have to go to red at which point my recommendation would be for everybody to stay home again."
Nation on 'its knees'
The hope of everyone was the states that reopened first would find a way to do so without triggering a surge in new cases and therefore begin to mitigate the terrible economic cost and knock-on psychological effects of lockdowns. But some 25 states are now seeing new infections rising, while the situation is steady in 12 and down in 13. It is dispiriting that the picture seems to get a little worse by the day. States like Michigan and California, which has already experienced painful months, have seen their curves begin to rise again. And while states like New York and the Washington metropolitan areas begin to emerge from lockdowns, the worsening data elsewhere offers daunting omens.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Dr. Robert Redfield told the same hearing that Fauci addressed on Tuesday, in a comment unlikely to please Trump, that the virus had "brought this nation to its knees."

"We've all done the best that we can do to tackle this virus," Redfield said, pleading for more investment in the country's health infrastructure.
Trump has responded to the latest flashing warnings signs with denial, anger, concern for his own political prospects and by continuing to hold the kind of events -- an indoor, rally style appearance in hard-hit Arizona on Tuesday -- that flout basic advice from his own government's top experts and could expose attendees to infections, serious illness or death and help further transmit infections.
Trump took a jab at Fauci's approval ratings in a tweet on Tuesday, then insisted that he was not kidding over the weekend when he told supporters he had told staff to slow down coronavirus testing -- after senior aides had tried to explain away the comment as in jest.
"I don't kid, let me just tell you, let me make it clear," Trump said before leaving for Arizona. "By having more tests, we have more cases," he added. Experts say testing is the key to tracking true incidence of the disease and breaking chains of infections. Fauci said that the US planned to test more people not fewer. And while Trump's claims that the US leads the world in gross numbers of tests produced, the total conducted over five months -- 22 million, according to Redfield -- is far short of what health experts say is necessary in per capita terms to defeat the virus.
According to a Harvard University report, the US needs 5 million tests per day and 20 million would be required to fully mobilize the economy. By way of comparison with US capacity, the city of Beijing alone says it can now test 1 million people per day.
Trump cofounds logic, own officials on testing
The President also barely mentioned the coronavirus during his visit to Arizona on Tuesday, preferring to tout his border wall and set off a new culture war spat over the pulling down of statues of historic Americans tainted by racism. This despite the fact that the Grand Canyon state is recording daily record highs in terms of new coronavirus infections.
While officials like Fauci are denied a White House platform and face criticism from Trump, officials with no medical expertise, like Larry Kudlow, director of the United States Economic Council, are free to go on television and make inaccurate assessments of the situation.
"There are some hotspots. We're on it. We know how to deal with this stuff now," Kudlow told CNBC on Monday.
The President's events meanwhile send exactly the wrong message on precautions like social distancing and the wearing of masks -- which are the only current tools to fight a virus for which there are few treatments, no current cure and no vaccine.

"Here in the United States, as we're opening up we're seeing increases in cases, we're seeing once again hospitals getting overwhelmed," Dr. Richard Besser, former acting director of the CDC, told CNN's "New Day."
"Hopefully we're improving in terms of our knowledge of how to treat people, and so that may lead to some better outcomes for some. And that's encouraging. But we have a long way to go, and we can't count on the virus toning down in terms of how it attacks."

America's mask resistance is just the latest example of a perennial struggle

Analysis by Stephen Collinson with Caitlin Hu

Updated 2153 GMT (0553 HKT) June 23, 2020
Hear from residents not wearing masks as state's Covid-19 cases rise

America was born in rebellion and it's a spirit that still runs deep in its character.
The perennial American struggle between government and the veneration of individual liberty is boiling to a head again: Some citizens are balking at expert guidance for them to cover their faces, in order to check the spread of the coronavirus.

If you live in a country where the balance between personal rights and collective well-being falls differently, you might consider the refusal to wear a mask to be pure selfishness. But while plenty of Americans are wearing masks, rebellion is part of the country's political DNA. Ashley Smith from North Carolina, for example, recently burned a mask in a frying pan in a Facebook video, and told CNN sister channel HLN that mandatory mask use infringes "our freedoms." In Arizona, where the coronavirus infection rate is spiking, Charles Gbekia said he wouldn't wear a mask even though he's lost family to the virus. In California, where masks have just been made mandatory, a top health official said Monday that she had received death threats over the issue.

President Donald Trump is hardly helping, with his message that masking up is intrinsically weak, liberal and un-American. Last week, he mused that Americans who wore face coverings were trying to hurt him politically.
As he often does, he is tearing at a social fault line for his own political gain. But it's not the first time masks have become a political flashpoint -- it was the same in the influenza pandemic in 1918, when Americans were told to make masks at home. Iowans back then were enraged at orders to wear masks on trolley cars. And in California, one doctor who called for the use of masks was blasted as a "faddist" and a "purveyor of mask propaganda." The current debate also parallels past showdowns over the government sticking its nose into seat belts, smoking and guns.
The lesson of history is clear: Tell insubordinate Americans to wear a mask if you must. But if the government tells them to strap one on, there'll be trouble.

'PRINTED BY FOREIGN COUNTRIES'
Reeling after a weekend campaign rally with lower-than-expected turnout, President Donald Trump changed the subject Monday morning with a series of widely debunked lies about alleged voter fraud in US elections, writes CNN's Marshall Cohen. "RIGGED 2020 ELECTION: MILLIONS OF MAIL-IN BALLOTS WILL BE PRINTED BY FOREIGN COUNTRIES, AND OTHERS. IT WILL BE THE SCANDAL OF OUR TIMES!" Trump tweeted, among other claims.
The catch: Trump's primary allegation -- that voting by mail leads to "massive fraud" -- is just completely untrue. Contrary to the President's claims, there are many more cases of eligible voters who didn't receive their mail ballots on time, and therefore potentially were disenfranchised, than there are examples of people fraudulently casting multiple ballots, according to a CNN review of data from a half-dozen recent primaries. Officials are trying to resolve these issues before November.
It would be a "waste of paper" for foreign countries to print fraudulent ballots, according to Michael McDonald, a political science professor at the University of Florida who runs the United States Elections Project and is a leading authority on voting data and statistics. "The legally valid (ballots) printed by election officials have many safeguards to protect against fraudulent voting," he tweeted.

Postcard from Phase Two, NYC-style
On Monday, New York City entered the second phase of its reopening plan, which means offices can now reopen, restaurants can offer terrace dining and barbers can finally start making New Yorkers presentable again.
Though hailed in theory and badly needed for many small businesses, these openings may not have a huge impact on the daily life of the city. Of the office workers who still have jobs, many are opting to work from home instead of trekking into Manhattan. And al fresco dining has already been the norm for weeks in Brooklyn, where sidewalks bustle with block-long barbecues, and dinner parties are seated bleacher-style on brownstone stoops. (The novelty of getting your hair done after more than 100 days of lockdown, however, is still a big deal.)
Oddly, it's the parts of the city that have been anointed as lawfully open that still often feel the most shut down, in part due to social distancing requirements. Subway stations are suspiciously silent, with none of the mass shuffling and murmuring of the pre-coronavirus commuting rush. Narrow storefronts feel cavernous, as signs admonish customers to queue outside. In contrast, the forbidden waters of Rockaway Beach were full of splashing kids and adults on a recent weekend.
And as temperatures spike and police reassess their methods, illicit business seems to be accelerating -- murders, burglaries and shootings in the city are rising dramatically. The soundtrack to this summer is the nightly whine and crack of banned fireworks -- usually from multiple directions and with such unprecedented frequency that some local law enforcement staffers are starting to wonder if they're being used to cover up the sounds of gunshots.
While large swathes of the city still remain painfully stalled, there's evidence on every street corner that many New Yorkers aren't waiting for any official all-clear.
'She's not allowed to write a book'

In case new books about first lady Melania Trump and by former national security adviser John Bolton aren't enough, there's another potential paperback bombshell on the way this summer: Mary Trump, the President's niece, has penned a book described as a "revelatory, authoritative portrait of Donald J. Trump and the toxic family that made him." The book is set to be released on July 28, according to the book's publisher, Simon & Schuster.
"She's not allowed to write a book," Trump told Axios in an interview Friday. "You know, when we settled with her and her brother, who I do have a good relationship with - she's got a brother, Fred, who I do have a good relationship with, but when we settled, she has a total ... signed a nondisclosure."


America's coronavirus plateau, and the global reverberations of George Floyd's death

Analysis by Stephen Collinson with Caitlin Hu

Updated 1832 GMT (0232 HKT) June 23, 2020
US President Donald Trump and Vice President Mike Pence confer at a daily briefing of the coronavirus task force at the White House on April 23, 2020 in Washington, DC.

Vice President Mike Pence, helming a disinformation campaign to convince Americans the threat from Covid-19 has largely passed, is accusing the media of hyping a "second wave" of infections. Unfortunately, the US hasn't even exited the first wave yet -- not least because of the denial and mismanagement that has plagued its response to the virus.
As epicenters like New York and New Jersey emerge from weeks of tragedy, the virus has simply found other targets. Texas, Arizona, and Florida -- Republican-run states that embraced President Donald Trump's demands to reopen -- are now experiencing record rates of new infections. Trump is meanwhile going ahead with an indoor rally in Tulsa, Oklahoma, on Saturday, even though it offers ideal conditions to spread the virus.
The truth is that the US is nowhere near the end of its fight with Covid-19, as comparisons with other countries make clear. While nations like South Korea, Germany, Japan and Italy saw a steep rise in infections, they are now well down the other side of the mountain. The US meanwhile has plateaued at a high level, and the chart of its daily infections looks more like a trek along an Alpine range rather than a single peak.

There's clearly a price to pay when the President's concern for the economy -- that is so vital for his reelection hopes -- leads him to flout his own government's advice on re-opening and on wearing a mask. As Dr. Ashish Jha, director of Harvard's Global Health Institute, put it: "We may be done with a pandemic, but the pandemic is not done with us."
Spot the difference

What's in the Bolton book
Trump on Wednesday signed the Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act of 2020, a bill that calls for eventual sanctions against perpetrators of human rights abuses against China's ethnic Uyghur population. It seems like a huge coincidence that this emerged at almost the same moment as a former national security advisor's claim that Trump once encouraged Chinese President Xi Jinping to build detention camps in the Uyghur homeland of western Xinjiang province. The revelation was part of an excerpt of John Bolton's forthcoming book, published by The Wall Street Journal on Wednesday.
"At the opening dinner of the Osaka G-20 meeting in June 2019, with only interpreters present, Xi had explained to Trump why he was basically building concentration camps in Xinjiang," Bolton wrote. "According to our interpreter, Trump said that Xi should go ahead with building the camps, which Trump thought was exactly the right thing to do."
The passage also offers Bolton's observations on Trump's broader China strategy, which he describes as motivated by self-interest. "Trump's conversations with Xi reflected not only the incoherence in his trade policy but also the confluence in Trump's mind of his own political interests and US national interests," he wrote.
"Trump commingled the personal and the national not just on trade questions but across the whole field of national security. I am hard-pressed to identify any significant Trump decision during my White House tenure that wasn't driven by reelection calculations."
Echoes
As US anti-racism protests continue to be felt globally, the police killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis last month reverberated in Geneva, Damascus and Brussels on Wednesday -- though not always in solidarity with the cause.
'I am asking you to help us'
George Floyd's brother appealed to the United Nations "to help black people in America." Prompted by a coalition of African member states, the United Nations Human Rights Council held an urgent debate Wednesday on police brutality and systemic racism in the US. In a video message, Philonise Floyd, addressed the gathering in Geneva: "I am asking you (the UN) to help him. I am asking you to help me. I am asking you to help us -- black people in America."
'We need to send a strong signal to the US, but also sweep in front of our own door'
The European Parliament began with a moment of silence for Floyd before opening the floor to members to discuss their own experiences with police brutality. Germany's Dr. Pierrette Herzberger-Fofana, of the Greens/European Free Alliance, described being searched by police who refused to believe she was an MEP "even though he had my two passports in his hand."
"I have experienced racism. I've been surrounded by 14 neo-Nazis shouting at me. I frequently get stopped at airports. Once I was even separated from my friends for hours. I hear prejudiced remarks about black people. But then, 'You are an exception,' and I say, 'No. I am not,'" said Luxembourg's Monica Semedo, of the Renew Party.
"A few days after the killing of George Floyd I was putting my youngest daughter to bed. She shuffled away and went silent and asked me, 'Will they kill me too?'" said Sweden's Alice Kuhnke, of the Greens/European Free Alliance. "We need to send a strong signal to the US, but also to sweep in front of our own door."

'The last one who has the right to talk about human rights'
The US unrolled aggressive sanctions Wednesday against Syria's Assad regime, which has been accused of committing war crimes and crimes against humanity on a vast scale in order to quash Syria's armed opposition. An official source at Syria's Foreign and Expatriates Ministry responded to the sanctions with a jibe at US moral authority, seeming to reference Floyd's death: "The US administration, which hunts its citizens in the streets of its states, kills people and practices the ugliest forms of discrimination, is the last one who has the right to talk about the human rights," he told state-run news agency SANA. 


 It's too early to conclude that Trump has lost his magic

Analysis by Stephen Collinson with Caitlin Hu

Updated 1828 GMT (0228 HKT) June 23, 2020
President Donald Trump arrives on stage to speak at a campaign rally at the BOK Center, Saturday, June 20, 2020, in Tulsa, Okla. (AP Photo/Evan Vucci)

Donald Trump's face was as red as his "Make America Great Again" hat.
The President's reelection campaign had high hopes for this weekend. It boasted that a million people requested tickets to Trump's rally on Saturday night, and even made plans to accommodate an overflow crowd of 40,000 outside the arena in Tulsa, Oklahoma. But his big return to the campaign trail turned into an embarrassment -- only 6,200 people (about one-third the venue's capacity) showed up, said the local fire department.
Trump's aides tried to cover his blushes by blaming protesters for scaring supporters away. But rows of empty seats and a deserted area in front of the planned overflow stage told their own story. Could it have been fear of the coronavirus? Waning enthusiasm for the President himself? Whatever the reason, Trump built his own boobytrap by boasting about the expected crowds, in hopes of portraying wild heartland support despite his gruesome run of crises and controversies.

Critics spent Sunday gloating about his humiliation, but it's too early to conclude that Trump has lost his magic -- crowd sizes are an unscientific way to judge the state of a campaign. There was also little to learn from the rally itself, which contained Trump's usual mix of grievances, lies, bizarre diversions and casual racism. The biggest cheer came when he showed he could drink water from a glass using one hand -- a feat of no small significance after previous two-fisted attempts to hydrate raised questions about his health.
Trump is reportedly furious about the turnout. As always happens when something goes wrong, word has emerged that his daughter Ivanka and her husband Jared Kushner aren't happy either. So with Trump trailing Democrat Joe Biden badly in the polls, campaign manager Brad Parscale might want to watch his back.

Meanwhile producer Shelby Rose spent part of her Sunday counting every single word Trump dedicated during his Tulsa speech to defending how he walked and drank water during a prior visit to West Point (1,826) -- compared to how many words he spent addressing the coronavirus pandemic (859).
'Leftists and online trolls doing a victory lap'

Many of those who asked for tickets to Trump's rally may have been trolling the President, in a stunt organized mainly through TikTok. The social media platform is normally thought of as a place for dancing teenagers, but CNN's Donie O'Sullivan reports that a coordinated effort on TikTok encouraged people to register online for the rally and not show up.
On Sunday, Parscale responded: "Leftists and online trolls doing a victory lap, thinking they somehow impacted rally attendance, don't know what they're talking about or how our rallies work," he told CNN, adding that "registering for a rally means you've RSVPed with a cell phone number and we constantly weed out bogus numbers, as we did with tens of thousands at the Tulsa rally, in calculating our possible attendee pool. These phony ticket requests never factor into our thinking."
But if it's not the fake RSVPs, Meanwhile would like to know what did factor into the miscalculation that anticipated tens of thousands of attendees and got 6,200.
Blind justice
Investigate the President, and odds are good you'll be fired.
In his latest blow to the independence of America's judiciary, Trump this weekend dismissed one of the country's top prosecutors, Geoffrey Berman, the US Attorney for the Southern District of New York. Among many high profile investigations -- including the alleged sex trafficking ring once run by Jeffrey Epstein -- Berman's office was probing the business ties of Trump's personal lawyer, Rudolph Giuliani, and had indicted a state-owned bank in Turkey -- a case in which President Recep Tayyip Erdogan asked Trump to intervene.

Berman joins a long list of those who have paid with their jobs for looking too closely into the President's conduct. Former FBI Director James Comey was one of the first to go, in the middle of the Russia investigation. Comey's former deputy Andrew McCabe was hounded out of office too. Former Attorney General Jeff Sessions -- who angered Trump by recusing himself from the Russia investigation -- also had to go. He was eventually replaced by William Barr, who has emerged more as Trump's enforcer than as a guarantor of impartial justice.
Trump has also gutted the ranks of the government's watchdogs, known as inspectors general, who investigate corruption and malfeasance in Washington. After the Senate acquitted Trump in his impeachment trial last year, Trump is demonstrating that he is all but unrestrainable -- and could become utterly unfettered if he wins a second term.

Presidential debates and Modi's China challenge

Analysis by Stephen Collinson with Caitlin Hu and Vedika Sud

Updated 1824 GMT (0224 HKT) June 23, 2020
Rudy Giuliani, former New York City mayor and current lawyer for U.S. President Donald Trump, speaks to members of the media during a White House Sports and Fitness Day at the South Lawn of the White House May 30, 2018 in Washington, DC. 

Rudy Giuliani is up to his tricks again.
The mastermind behind Donald Trump's Ukraine imbroglio is now sticking his oar in this autumn's presidential debates. The former New York mayor-turned-presidential fixer has been nominated by Trump to push for more than the three traditional debates between the two major party candidates ahead of the election.
At one point it seemed as though the US President might skip the debates altogether. But now, trailing behind Democrat Joe Biden in the polls, he's got an incentive to engage his rival as often as possible.

Presidential debates have for years been sponsored by a non-profit commission under the oversight of both parties. They tend to be rather staid affairs -- partly because of all the conditions typically imposed by each campaign. It's pretty obvious Trump thinks Biden has lost a step, an impression he thinks he can bring across to Americans with his scorched earth debate strategy. But Biden is not a bad debater himself -- though he never hit top form during Democratic campaign debates, he performed strongly in vice presidential debates while on Barack Obama's ticket.
Trump's gambit poses an interesting challenge for Biden. If he refuses a rolling series of debates, Trump will claim Biden can't handle the heat and wants to stay in his basement until November. But why should Biden's camp deal with Giuliani -- his old former rival, who goaded Ukraine to probe false accusations of corruption against him? And tactically, why give Trump any more opportunities to get on level terms?
If Trump wanted to play fair, he wouldn't have picked Giuliani. Enlisting the garrulous pro-Trump streetfighter suggests that the goal is less to embrace a traditional public exercise in democracy, and more like just another backroom scheme to make Biden look bad.
'Do you get the impression that the Supreme Court doesn't like me?'

The Supreme Court on Thursday blocked the Trump administration's attempt to end Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, which protects from deportation hundreds of thousands of people who were brought illegally to the US as children. The crucial vote in the five-four ruling was cast by conservative Chief Justice John Roberts, who penned the opinion. "We do not decide whether DACA or its rescission are sound policies," Roberts wrote. "'The wisdom' of those decisions 'is none of our concern.' We address only whether the agency complied with the procedural requirement that it provide a reasoned explanation for its action."
But Trump, who was recently disappointed by another SCOTUS ruling against hiring discrimination of LGBTQ people, seemed to take it personally. "Do you get the impression that the Supreme Court doesn't like me?" he tweeted Thursday.

Postcard from Delhi
The deadliest clash between Indian and Chinese troops since 1975 took place this week in a remote valley in the Himalayas. Until last week, both countries had seemed to be trying to de-escalate tensions along the area's disputed border. But Monday's gruesome combat between border soldiers proves how quickly unresolved issues between the neighboring giants can turn lethal.
It all started with a tent, a source in the Indian Armed Forces tells me. Chinese troops had erected the shelter on disputed land, and Indian soldiers and a commanding officer dismantled it, the source said, adding that the Chinese troops left -- but returned later that day with reinforcements, armed with stones and bamboo poles riddled with nails. Firearms are not carried by Chinese or Indian troops along the Sino-India border.
They fought for at least four hours, says the source, in a bloody brawl that killed 20 Indian soldiers. A statement by the Indian Army mentions casualties on both sides, though China has not admitted to any deaths on its side. (CNN has not independently confirmed the details of the clash.)
For 36 hours afterward, India's populist prime minister Narendra Modi made no public protest. "Why is the PM silent. Why is he hiding? Enough is enough. We need to know what has happened," tweeted Rahul Gandhi, a senior member of India's main opposition party. But on Wednesday afternoon, Modi drew a line in the sand: "India wants peace," he said, "but it is capable of giving a befitting reply when provoked." The sacrifice of Indian soldiers would not go in vain, he added.
Here's Modi's dilemma: Taking bold diplomatic or economic action against China could derail border talks -- but little or no action could embolden China's incursion attempts, and further upset Modi's domestic support.

Here in New Delhi, 60 people including army veterans protested outside the Chinese Embassy. Defaced posters and effigies of the Chinese President were burnt in some parts of the country. Since Wednesday, #BoycottChina and #GoChina have been trending on twitter in India. There is a growing demand to shun Chinese apps and goods. And there are strong murmurs of terminating Chinese contracts in the telecom and railways sector. Blinded by nationalist sentiments, the basic fact that China is one of India's biggest trade partners is being overlooked by seething Indians.
Countering China's relentless attempts for regional hegemony is now one of the biggest challenges Modi faces in his second term, especially after informal summits with Xi Jinping in Wuhan and South India failed to bridge the trust deficit on the border shared by the two nuclear powers. -- CNN's Vedika Sud writes to Meanwhile from New Delhi 


Trump's pandemic failing is now directly impacting his campaign
Stephen Collinson Profile

Analysis by Stephen Collinson, CNN

Updated 1536 GMT (2336 HKT) June 23, 2020

President Donald Trump is now paying a direct, personal price for his pandemic denial -- the possible shelving of the thing he cares about most, the raucous rallies that defined his political rise and are crucial to his reelection hopes.
Trump spent the weekend seething about the disappointing crowd for his comeback event in Oklahoma on Saturday night, according to CNN reporting. His hopes of a full-time return to the campaign trail then took another blow with news that eight staffers and two Secret Service agents at the event are now positive for the coronavirus.
The test results cast Trump's risky decision to go ahead with an indoor rally that doctors fear turned into a super-spreader infectious event in an even worse light. They also show how the virus -- now marching through southern and western states despite Trump's insistence that the US has already "prevailed" in the fight -- is having a disastrous impact on the "Great American Comeback" narrative at the heart of his reelection bid.

Far from easing the political damage caused by the virus, Trump keeps exacerbating it. On Monday, he gave new life to a controversy caused by his remark on Saturday that he told his staff to slow testing for the virus to avoid discovering new cases, which in itself reflected his negligence in responding to a pandemic that has now killed more than 120,000 Americans.
After his White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany offered the dubious excuse that Trump was speaking in "jest," the President dug his hole deeper during an interview with the Christian Broadcasting Network.

Trump, who described his remark as "semi-tongue in cheek," continued to argue that the problem in the United States is not that the virus is so widespread, but that testing keeps discovering how deeply it has penetrated in the community.
"Instead of 25 million tests, let's say we did 10 million tests, we'd look like we were doing much better because we'd have far fewer cases. You understand that. I wouldn't do that, but I will say this: We do so much more than other countries it makes us in a way look bad but actually we're doing the right thing," Trump said.
The comments seem to set off yet another new political storm that will further complicate attempts by the President's campaign team to rebound after Saturday's embarrassment. The campaign team is now considering smaller venues for Trump events -- a move that would surely bruise the commander in chief's ego, or outdoor locations where supporters might feel more comfortable.
Limits on campaigning would be intolerable for any President seeking reelection. For Trump, such a crimping of his style would be even worse, given the centrality of his big rallies to his political id and the morale boosting role they fulfill for a president who is an outsider in Washington.

A strong base

There is no doubt that the President has a tight hold on Republican voters -- the unwillingness of GOP senators to rebuke him over his latest racist comment-- when he called the coronavirus that originated in China "the kung flu" -- is proof of that.
And Fox News said that Trump's return to the trail secured its biggest Saturday night television audience in its history, suggesting that while some Trump fans might have been concerned about the virus, their absence from Tulsa was not down to diminished enthusiasm.
Trump has always defied political gravity -- and the effect of months of stay-at-home orders and lockdowns makes it even more difficult than usual for political analysts to get a solid assessment on how much of the country now views the President.
But the rally controversy points to more fundamental political challenges facing Trump as he trails former Democratic Vice President Joe Biden in the polls and the virus tightens its grip on nearly half the country.
View Trump and Biden head-to-head polling
Saturday night's event was meant to send a signal that the worst of the danger from the pandemic has expired and that America is on the comeback trail. Instead, it suggested that even Trump's supporters who elected not to show up in an indoor event that brought the risk of infection, may not yet believe the core message of their hero's campaign.
With every chance that thousands more Americans die before Election Day, Trump must face the prospect that his denial and mismanagement of the pandemic that left the country ill prepared for a deadly public health crisis is becoming a millstone that his campaign may never be able to shake off.

Searing attacks

The President's response to a miserable 48 hours was typical -- an all-out attack. His targeting of Biden and the Democrats, demonstrating his ferocious tenacity in a way that also hinted at concern in his inner circle.
Trump fired off a series of searing claims on Twitter -- that have no basis in fact -- that mail-in voting being considered by many states will lead to massive fraud and foreign interference in November's election.
The President's team followed up with a new offensive against Biden's health and mental faculties. They claimed that the former vice president's decision to stick to convention and only sign up for the three official presidential debates in the fall -- and not the extra encounters Trump is demanding -- shows the former vice president has trepidation about taking on the President. The tactic was a return to the effort to define Biden as unfit to serve as President -- that does not appear to be working, if battleground state polls are anything to go on.
Trump also returned to the safe place to which he often returns when he's in political trouble -- hardline immigration policy, signing an executive order that further restricts legal immigration.
On Tuesday, Trump will head to Arizona to tour a section of his border wall that was so fundamental to his appeal to conservative base supporters in his first presidential election campaign.
The President's actions were all aggressive gambits that might appeal to his keenest supporters. Taken together with Saturday's campaign rally that contained meandering diversions, lavish self-praise, casual racism and disinformation, it was difficult to see how they would appeal to wavering voters who do not belong to Trump's base.
The Arizona trip -- while it will provide fodder for Trump's conservative media cheering section -- will surely be overshadowed by the state's increasingly intense battle with the virus. The Grand Canyon state was among 10 other mostly Trump-won states that saw their highest seven-day average of daily new coronavirus cases on June 21, according to data from Johns Hopkins University.
While the President is out of town, two of his top public health officials, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Dr. Robert Redfield and the government's top infectious disease expert Dr. Anthony Fauci, will testify before a House committee on the increasingly grave situation in many states.
Trump will attempt to put the embarrassing scenes of Saturday night behind him when he addresses a "Students for Trump" event in Arizona.
Attendees have been told to bring face masks to the event but will not be forced to wear them.

Democrats are already seeking to exploit Trump's remark about slowing testing in Oklahoma, portraying it as emblematic of a mismanaged effort to tackle a virus that caused a shutdown of the economy.
"Two nights ago in his diatribe, he told them to stop testing because the numbers were going up ... I mean, my God," Biden told a fundraising event, according to a pool report on Monday.

CNN's Kevin Liptak and Kaitlan Collins contributed to this report.








