The chicken first crossed the road in Southeast Asia, landmark gene study finds
By Andrew Lawler Jun. 24, 2020 

It is the world's most common farm animal as well as humanity's largest single source of animal protein. Some 24 billion strong, it outnumbers all other birds by an order of magnitude. Yet for 2 centuries, biologists have struggled to explain how the chicken became the chicken.
Now, the first extensive study of the bird's full genome concludes that people in northern Southeast Asia or southern China domesticated a colorful pheasant sometime after about 7500 B.C.E. Migrants and traders then carried the bird across Asia and on to every continent except Antarctica.
Our results contradict previous claims that chickens were domesticated in northern China and the Indus Valley," researchers led by Ming-Shan Wang from the Chinese Academy of Sciences's Kunming Institute of Zoology write in a paper published today in Cell Research. They also found that the modern chicken's chief ancestor is a subspecies of red jungle fowl named Gallus gallus spadiceus.

"This is obviously a landmark study," says Dorian Fuller, an archaeologist at University College London who was not involved in the effort. He adds that the results could shed light on the emergence of agriculture and early trade networks, and what features of the bird made it so attractive to people.

Charles Darwin argued the chicken descended from the red jungle fowl because the birds resemble each other and can make fertile offspring; he speculated that domestication happened in India. But five varieties of the pheasant inhabit a broad arc extending from the jungles of Indonesia to the Himalayan foothills of Pakistan. Which variety led to the chicken, and where, was uncertain. Based on presumed chicken bones, archaeologists claimed, variously, that people domesticated the bird 9000 years ago in northern China and 4000 years ago in Pakistan.

DNA studies promised to resolve the issue, but researchers had few samples from the bird's wild relatives. So Jianlin Han, a geneticist at the Joint Laboratory on Livestock and Forage Genetic Resources, embarked on a 20-year project to sample indigenous village chickens and wild jungle fowl near more than 120 villages across Asia and Africa.

Wang's team sequenced the full genomes of 863 birds and compared them. The results suggest modern chickens descend primarily from domesticated and wild varieties in what is now Myanmar, Laos, Thailand, and southern China (see map, right). "This region is a center of domestication," says co-author and geneticist Olivier Hanotte of the University of Nottingham. The results confirm a hypothesis put forward in 1994 by Japan's Crown Prince Akishino, an ornithologist, on the basis of mitochondrial DNA data.

Wang's team did find some evidence for a South Asian contribution: A jungle fowl native to the Indian subcontinent may have interbred with the chicken after its initial domestication in Southeast Asia, the team says.

The new DNA data link domesticated chickens most closely to the Southeast Asian subspecies G. g. spadiceus, however. They suggest the lineage that became the modern chicken branched off from the jungle fowl between 12,800 and 6200 years ago, with domestication occurring sometime after the lineages split.

uller doubts the bird was fully domesticated before the arrival of rice and millet farming in northern Southeast Asia about 4500 years ago. Hanotte acknowledges that "we need the help of archaeologists" to understand the human events that triggered domestication.

But Jonathan Kenoyer, an archaeologist and Indus expert at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, remains skeptical that the chicken arose in Southeast Asia. "They need to get ancient DNA" to back up their claims, he says, because genomes of modern birds may provide limited clues to early events in chicken evolution.

Nor does the DNA show what first enticed people to tame the bird. Early varieties were far scrawnier and produced fewer eggs than today's industrial varieties, and their predators were legion. Some researchers suggest the bird was initially prized for its exotic plumage or for cockfighting. Selling prize fighting cocks remains a lucrative business in Southeast Asia, and the birds' high value may have spurred traders to carry them long distances.

Smithsonian Institution archaeozoologist Melinda Zeder calls the new paper "fascinating" and says it shows "the domestication and dispersal story is more complicated than we thought." She urges combining genetic and archaeological data to flesh out the tale. Archaeologists are now gathering chicken bones that suggest farmers in southern China and Southeast Asia first domesticated the bird some 3500 years ago-findings that bolster the genetic work.

Han's group, meanwhile, is creating a massive data set based on more than 1500 modern chicken genomes from Asia, Europe, and Africa. The researchers plan to analyze chicken dispersal into Europe and Africa, as well as the genetic variations behind traits such as the ability to withstand disease or produce more eggs. "This study opens a whole new page in chicken genomics," Han says.


Pocket Therapist

Mobile phones have changed the field of mental health self-treatments. Mobile phone user no longer needs therapist to start their own therapy. Mobile phone applications offer versatile possibilities of self-development for the user. User can develop their cognitive abilities, memory, or gain some stress-management tools. User can also treat their depression or anxiety with a mobile phone app.

Mobile software applications are easy-to-approach-tools for many mental issues. They are always available and ready to offer guidance mobile phone owner is seeking. Most of the apps are also very affordable if compared to therapists, psychologists, or mental guides of any sort. Mental health apps can comfort the user also when it is not otherwise possible. Everything sounds fine, but it still raises many questions, like "How efficient, these self-treatment applications are?"

Liza Hoffman, Emily Benedetto, Hsiang Huang, Ellie Grossman, Dorosella Kaluma, Ziva Mann, and John Torous researched the effectiveness of mobile apps meant to help with insomnia, anxiety, and depression. They included several different mobile phone applications to their research to cover a variety of mental health issues. Based on their research "Augmenting Mental Health in Primary Care: A 1-Year Study of Deploying Smartphone Apps in a Multi-site Primary Care/Behavioral Health Integration Program, Al", approximately 2/3 of patients using mobile apps considered them useful and helpful. Even though most users found apps useful, there is still a remarkable minority that could not benefit from them. Approximately 20% of patients could not use mobile apps. This was also the major reason they did not benefit from apps. I calculated based on these numbers that lack of ability to use the apps explained about 60% of the cases where apps were not useful.

Another research focused on one software application. The article "Guided Self-Help Works" explains the test results of the anxiety disorder and depression treatment app Pasifica. The research goal was to find out if Pasifica could help those who must wait for their first appointment. Pasifica offers guided exercises and peer-support. Peer-support is not moderated or controlled by health professionals. It allows app users to share their experiences anonymously. Researches compared Pasifica's users to people who were on the wait list for treatment. Using the app offered significant help for patients who were waiting for their first appointment with their therapist. Researches did not compare Pasifica's users to those patients who had already had therapy sessions.

Often researches of mental health apps have a focus on how the app works as a sidekick. It is obvious, that mental health apps make a valuable contribution that improves the user's condition. That is why scientists tend to consider mental apps as great tools. In both cases mentioned above, researchers concluded that apps are surely better than doing nothing. In these researches traditional therapy scheme is still untouched. Therapist still leads and guides therapy and mobile phone user is still patient, who is subject to medical care treatment.

This traditional scheme is now changing. In some cases, mobile phone app is the solution instead of being part of the solution. An app can really take the role of the solo artist and replace a human therapist. Insomnia, for example, is an issue that has also app-based therapy. In the article Efficacy of a Theory-Based Cognitive Behavioral Technique App-Based Intervention for Patients With Insomnia: Randomized Controlled Trial, researchers conclude that stand-alone insomnia treatment with the digital cognitive behavioral technique has positive results. The only human insomnia therapist, the app user needs, is the one looking back from the mirror. Maybe it is also reflecting future of the mental therapy.



